EN
Article 9.
Processing of special categories of personal data
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
www.data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com
info@data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Article 9.
1. Processing of personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs,
or trade union membership, and the processing of genetic data, biometric data for the purpose of uniquely
identifying a natural person, data concerning health or data concerning a natural person’s sex life or sexual
orientation shall be prohibited.
Recitals
(51) Personal data which are, by their nature, particularly sensitive in relation to fundamental rights and freedoms merit specific
protection as the context of their processing could create significant risks to the fundamental rights and freedoms. Those personal
data should include personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin, whereby the use of the term ‘racial origin’ in this Regulation does
not imply an acceptance by the Union of theories which attempt to determine the existence of separate human races. The processing
of photographs should not systematically be considered to be processing of special categories of personal data as they are covered by
the definition of biometric data only when processed through a specific technical means allowing the unique identification or
authentication of a natural person. Such personal data should not be processed, unless processing is allowed in specific cases set out in
this Regulation, taking into account that Member States law may lay down specific provisions on data protection in order to adapt the
application of the rules of this Regulation for compliance with a legal obligation or for the performance of a task carried out in the
public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller. In addition to the specific requirements for such
processing, the general principles and other rules of this Regulation should apply, in particular as regards the conditions for lawful
processing. Derogations from the general prohibition for processing such special categories of personal data should be explicitly
provided, inter alia, where the data subject gives his or her explicit consent or in respect of specific needs in particular where the
processing is carried out in the course of legitimate activities by certain associations or foundations the purpose of which is to permit
the exercise of fundamental freedoms.
Guidelines & Case Law
Documents
Article 29 Working Party, Opinion 2/2012 on Facial Recognition in Online and Mobile Services (2012).
Article 29 Working Party, Opinion 3/2012 on Developments in Biometric Technologies (2012).
EDPB, Guidelines on the use of location data and contact tracing tools in the context of the COVID-19 outbreak (2020).
EDPB, Guidelines 8/2020 on the targeting of social media users (2020):
If a social media provider or a targeter uses observed data to categorise users as having certain religious, philosophical or
political beliefs-regardless of whether the categorization is correct/true or not-this categorisation of the user must obviously be
seen as processing of special category of personal data in this context. As long as the categorisation enables targeting based on
special category data, it does not matter how the category is labelled.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 2 / 11
www.gdpr-text.com/en
EDPB, Guidelines 06/2020 on the interplay of the Second Payment Services Directive and the GDPR (2020).
Financial transactions can reveal sensitive information about individual data subject, including those related to special
categories of personal data. For example, political opinions and religious beliefs may be revealed by donations made to political
parties or organisations, churches or parishes. Trade union membership may be revealed by the deduction of an annual
membership fee from a person’s bank account. Personal data concerning health may be gathered from analysing medical bills
paid by a data subject. Finally, information on certain purchases may reveal information concerning a person’s sex life or
sexual orientation.
Moreover, through the sum of financial transactions, different kinds of behavioural patterns could be revealed, including
special categories of personal data and additional services that are facilitated by account information services might rely on
profiling as defined by article 4 (4) of the GDPR. Therefore, the chances are considerable that a service provider processing
information on financial transactions of data subjects also processes special categories of personal data.
2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply if one of the following applies:
Recitals
(52) Derogating from the prohibition on processing special categories of personal data should also be allowed when provided for in
Union or Member State law and subject to suitable safeguards, so as to protect personal data and other fundamental rights, where it is
in the public interest to do so, in particular processing personal data in the field of employment law, social protection law including
pensions and for health security, monitoring and alert purposes, the prevention or control of communicable diseases and other serious
threats to health. Such a derogation may be made for health purposes, including public health and the management of health-care
services, especially in order to ensure the quality and cost-effectiveness of the procedures used for settling claims for benefits and
services in the health insurance system, or for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or
statistical purposes. A derogation should also allow the processing of such personal data where necessary for the establishment,
exercise or defence of legal claims, whether in court proceedings or in an administrative or out-of-court procedure.
(53) Special categories of personal data which merit higher protection should be processed for health-related purposes only where
necessary to achieve those purposes for the benefit of natural persons and society as a whole, in particular in the context of the
management of health or social care services and systems, including processing by the management and central national health
authorities of such data for the purpose of quality control, management information and the general national and local supervision of
the health or social care system, and ensuring continuity of health or social care and cross-border healthcare or health security,
monitoring and alert purposes, or for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or statistical
purposes, based on Union or Member State law which has to meet an objective of public interest, as well as for studies conducted in
the public interest in the area of public health. Therefore, this Regulation should provide for harmonised conditions for the
processing of special categories of personal data concerning health, in respect of specific needs, in particular where the processing of
such data is carried out for certain health-related purposes by persons subject to a legal obligation of professional secrecy. Union or
Member State law should provide for specific and suitable measures so as to protect the fundamental rights and the personal data of
natural persons. Member States should be allowed to maintain or introduce further conditions, including limitations, with regard to
the processing of genetic data, biometric data or data concerning health. However, this should not hamper the free flow of personal
data within the Union when those conditions apply to cross-border processing of such data.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 3 / 11
www.gdpr-text.com/en
(54) The processing of special categories of personal data may be necessary for reasons of public interest in the areas of public health
without consent of the data subject. Such processing should be subject to suitable and specific measures so as to protect the rights and
freedoms of natural persons. In that context, ‘public health’ should be interpreted as defined in Regulation (EC) No 1338/2008 of the
European Parliament and of the Council [11], namely all elements related to health, namely health status, including morbidity and
disability, the determinants having an effect on that health status, health care needs, resources allocated to health care, the provision
of, and universal access to, health care as well as health care expenditure and financing, and the causes of mortality. Such processing
of data concerning health for reasons of public interest should not result in personal data being processed for other purposes by third
parties such as employers or insurance and banking companies.
[11] Regulation (EC) No 1338/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on Community statistics
on
public
health
and
health
and
safety
at
work
(OJ
L
354,
31.12.2008,
p.
70).
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/AUTO/?uri=OJ:L:2008:354:TOC 
(55) Moreover, the processing of personal data by official authorities for the purpose of achieving the aims, laid down by
constitutional law or by international public law, of officially recognised religious associations, is carried out on grounds of public
interest.
(56) Where in the course of electoral activities, the operation of the democratic system in a Member State requires that political
parties compile personal data on people's political opinions, the processing of such data may be permitted for reasons of public
interest, provided that appropriate safeguards are established.
(a) the data subject has given explicit consent to the processing of those personal data for one or more specified
purposes, except where Union or Member State law provide that the prohibition referred to in paragraph 1 may not
be lifted by the data subject;
(b) processing is necessary for the purposes of carrying out the obligations and exercising specific rights of the
controller or of the data subject in the field of employment and social security and social protection law in so far
as it is authorised by Union or Member State law or a collective agreement pursuant to Member State law
providing for appropriate safeguards for the fundamental rights and the interests of the data subject;
(c) processing is necessary to protect the vital interests of the data subject or of another natural person where the
data subject is physically or legally incapable of giving consent;
(d) processing is carried out in the course of its legitimate activities with appropriate safeguards by a foundation,
association or any other not-for-profit body with a political, philosophical, religious or trade union aim and on
condition that the processing relates solely to the members or to former members of the body or to persons who
have regular contact with it in connection with its purposes and that the personal data are not disclosed outside that
body without the consent of the data subjects;
(e) processing relates to personal data which are manifestly made public by the data subject;
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 4 / 11
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Guidelines & Case Law
EDPB, Guidelines 8/2020 on the targeting of social media users (2020):
The word “manifestly” implies that there must be a high threshold for relying on this exemption.The EDPB notes that the
presence of a single element may not always be sufficient to establish that the data have been “manifestly” made public by the
data subject. In practice,a combination of the following or other elements may need to be considered for controllers to
demonstrate that the data subject has clearly manifested the intention to make the data public, and a case-by-case assessment
is needed. The following elements may be relevant to help inform this assessment:
the default settings of the social media platform (i.e. whether the data subject took a specific action to change these
default private settings into public ones); or
the nature of the social media platform (i.e. whether this platform is intrinsically linked with the idea of connecting
with close acquaintances of the data subject or creating intimate relations (such as online dating platforms), or if it is
meant to provide a wider scope of interpersonal relations, such as professional relations, or microblogging, etc… ; or
the accessibility of the page where the sensitive data is published (i.e. whether the information is publically accessible
or if, for instance, the creation of an account is necessary before accessing the information); or
the visibility of the information where the data subject is informed of the public nature of the information that they
publish (i.e. whether there is for example a continuous banner on the page, or whether the button for publishing
informs the data subject that the information will be made public…); or
if the data subject has published the sensitive data himself/herself, or whether instead the data has been published by a
third party (e.g. a photo published by a friend which reveals sensitive data) or inferred.
The EDPB notes that the presence of a single element may not always be sufficient to establish that the data have been
“manifestly” made public by the data subject. In practice,a combination of these or other elements may need to be considered
for controllers to demonstrate that the data subject has clearly manifested the intention to make the data public.
 
(f) processing is necessary for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims or whenever courts are acting
in their judicial capacity;
(g) processing is necessary for reasons of substantial public interest, on the basis of Union or Member State law
which shall be proportionate to the aim pursued, respect the essence of the right to data protection and provide for
suitable and specific measures to safeguard the fundamental rights and the interests of the data subject;
(h) processing is necessary for the purposes of preventive or occupational medicine, for the assessment of the
working capacity of the employee, medical diagnosis, the provision of health or social care or treatment or the
management of health or social care systems and services on the basis of Union or Member State law or pursuant
to contract with a health professional and subject to the conditions and safeguards referred to in paragraph 3;
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 5 / 11
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Guidelines & Case Law
EDPB, Guidelines on the use of location data and contact tracing tools in the context of the COVID-19 outbreak (2020).
(i) processing is necessary for reasons of public interest in the area of public health, such as protecting against
serious cross-border threats to health or ensuring high standards of quality and safety of health care and of
medicinal products or medical devices, on the basis of Union or Member State law which provides for suitable and
specific measures to safeguard the rights and freedoms of the data subject, in particular professional secrecy;
Guidelines & Case Law
Legislation
Regulation (EC) No 1338/2008 on Community Statistics on Public Health and Health and Safety at Work, OJEU L 354, 31 December
2008, p. 70.
Documents
EDPB, Guidelines on the use of location data and contact tracing tools in the context of the COVID-19 outbreak (2020).
(j) processing is necessary for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or
statistical purposes in accordance with Article 89(1) based on Union or Member State law which shall be
proportionate to the aim pursued, respect the essence of the right to data protection and provide for suitable and
specific measures to safeguard the fundamental rights and the interests of the data subject.
Guidelines & Case Law
Document
EDPB, Opinion 3/2019 Concerning the Questions and Answers on the Interplay Between the Clinical Trials Regulation (CTR) and the
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (art. 70.1.b)) (2019).
EDPB, Guidelines on the use of location data and contact tracing tools in the context of the COVID-19 outbreak (2020).
Legislation
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 6 / 11
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Regulation (EU) No 536/2014 on Clinical Trials on Medicinal Products for Human Use, OJEU L 158, 27 May 2014, p. 1.
3. Personal data referred to in paragraph 1 may be processed for the purposes referred to in point (h) of
paragraph 2 when those data are processed by or under the responsibility of a professional subject to the obligation
of professional secrecy under Union or Member State law or rules established by national competent bodies or by
another person also subject to an obligation of secrecy under Union or Member State law or rules established by
national competent bodies.
4. Member States may maintain or introduce further conditions, including limitations, with regard to the
processing of genetic data, biometric data or data concerning health.
General Data Protection Regulation (EU GDPR)
The latest consolidated version of the Regulation with corrections by Corrigendum, OJ L 127, 23.5.2018, p. 2
((EU) 2016/679). Source: EUR-lex.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 7 / 11
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Related information Article 9. Processing of special categories of
personal data
Recitals
(51) Personal data which are, by their nature, particularly sensitive in relation to fundamental rights and freedoms
merit specific protection as the context of their processing could create significant risks to the fundamental rights and
freedoms. Those personal data should include personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin, whereby the use of the
term ‘racial origin’ in this Regulation does not imply an acceptance by the Union of theories which attempt to
determine the existence of separate human races. The processing of photographs should not systematically be
considered to be processing of special categories of personal data as they are covered by the definition of biometric
data only when processed through a specific technical means allowing the unique identification or authentication of a
natural person. Such personal data should not be processed, unless processing is allowed in specific cases set out in
this Regulation, taking into account that Member States law may lay down specific provisions on data protection in
order to adapt the application of the rules of this Regulation for compliance with a legal obligation or for the
performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller.
In addition to the specific requirements for such processing, the general principles and other rules of this Regulation
should apply, in particular as regards the conditions for lawful processing. Derogations from the general prohibition
for processing such special categories of personal data should be explicitly provided, inter alia, where the data subject
gives his or her explicit consent or in respect of specific needs in particular where the processing is carried out in the
course of legitimate activities by certain associations or foundations the purpose of which is to permit the exercise of
fundamental freedoms.
(52) Derogating from the prohibition on processing special categories of personal data should also be allowed when
provided for in Union or Member State law and subject to suitable safeguards, so as to protect personal data and
other fundamental rights, where it is in the public interest to do so, in particular processing personal data in the field
of employment law, social protection law including pensions and for health security, monitoring and alert purposes,
the prevention or control of communicable diseases and other serious threats to health. Such a derogation may be
made for health purposes, including public health and the management of health-care services, especially in order to
ensure the quality and cost-effectiveness of the procedures used for settling claims for benefits and services in the
health insurance system, or for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or
statistical purposes. A derogation should also allow the processing of such personal data where necessary for the
establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims, whether in court proceedings or in an administrative or out-of-
court procedure.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 8 / 11
www.gdpr-text.com/en
(53) Special categories of personal data which merit higher protection should be processed for health-related
purposes only where necessary to achieve those purposes for the benefit of natural persons and society as a whole, in
particular in the context of the management of health or social care services and systems, including processing by the
management and central national health authorities of such data for the purpose of quality control, management
information and the general national and local supervision of the health or social care system, and ensuring continuity
of health or social care and cross-border healthcare or health security, monitoring and alert purposes, or for archiving
purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or statistical purposes, based on Union or
Member State law which has to meet an objective of public interest, as well as for studies conducted in the public
interest in the area of public health. Therefore, this Regulation should provide for harmonised conditions for the
processing of special categories of personal data concerning health, in respect of specific needs, in particular where
the processing of such data is carried out for certain health-related purposes by persons subject to a legal obligation
of professional secrecy. Union or Member State law should provide for specific and suitable measures so as to
protect the fundamental rights and the personal data of natural persons. Member States should be allowed to maintain
or introduce further conditions, including limitations, with regard to the processing of genetic data, biometric data or
data concerning health. However, this should not hamper the free flow of personal data within the Union when those
conditions apply to cross-border processing of such data.
(54) The processing of special categories of personal data may be necessary for reasons of public interest in the areas
of public health without consent of the data subject. Such processing should be subject to suitable and specific
measures so as to protect the rights and freedoms of natural persons. In that context, ‘public health’ should be
interpreted as defined in Regulation (EC) No 1338/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council [11], namely
all elements related to health, namely health status, including morbidity and disability, the determinants having an
effect on that health status, health care needs, resources allocated to health care, the provision of, and universal access
to, health care as well as health care expenditure and financing, and the causes of mortality. Such processing of data
concerning health for reasons of public interest should not result in personal data being processed for other purposes
by third parties such as employers or insurance and banking companies.
[11] Regulation (EC) No 1338/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on
Community statistics on public health and health and safety at work (OJ L 354, 31.12.2008, p. 70). https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/AUTO/?uri=OJ:L:2008:354:TOC
(55) Moreover, the processing of personal data by official authorities for the purpose of achieving the aims, laid
down by constitutional law or by international public law, of officially recognised religious associations, is carried out
on grounds of public interest.
(56) Where in the course of electoral activities, the operation of the democratic system in a Member State requires
that political parties compile personal data on people's political opinions, the processing of such data may be
permitted for reasons of public interest, provided that appropriate safeguards are established.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 9 / 11
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Guidelines & Case Law
Documents
Article 29 Working Party, Opinion 2/2010 on behavioural advertising (2010):
Any possible targeting of data subjects based on sensitive information opens the possibility of abuse.
Furthermore, given the sensitivity of such information and the possible awkward situations which may arise if
individuals receive advertising that reveals, for example, sexual preferences or political activity,
offering/using interest categories that would reveal sensitive data should be discouraged.
In this context, the only available legal ground that would legitimize the data processing would be explicit,
separate prior opt-in consent. The requirement for a separate, affirmative prior indication of the data
subjects’ agreement means that in no case would an opt-out consent mechanism meet the requirement of the
law. It also means that such consent could not be obtained through browser settings. To lawfully collect
and process this type of information, ad network providers would have to set up mechanisms to obtain explicit
prior consent, separate from other consent obtained for processing in general.
EDPB, Assessing the Necessity of Measures That Limit the Fundamental Right to the Protection of Personal Data: A
Toolkit (2017).
WP29, Opinion on data processing at work (2017).
European Commission, Commission Guidance on the application of Union data protection law in the electoral
context, A contribution from the European Commission to the Leaders’ meeting in Salzburg on 19-20 September 2018.
EDPB, Guidelines on Assessing the Proportionality of Measures That Limit the Fundamental Rights to Privacy and to
the Protection of Personal Data (2019).
EDPB, Guidelines on the use of location data and contact tracing tools in the context of the COVID-19 outbreak
(2020).
EDPB, Guidelines 8/2020 on the targeting of social media users (2020).
EDPB, Guidelines 3/2020 on the Processing of Data Concerning Health for the Purpose of Scientific Research in the
Context of the Covid-19 Outbreak (2020).
EDPB, Guidelines 3/2019 on Processing of Personal Data through Video Devices (2020).
European Commission, Guidance on Apps supporting the fight against COVID 19 pandemic in relation to data
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 10 / 11
www.gdpr-text.com/en
protection Brussels (2020).
EDPB, Guidelines 02/2021 on Virtual Voice Assistants (2021).
Case Law
Grainger Plc v. Nicholson, [2010] ICR 360.
CJEC, Lindqvist, C-101/01 (2003).
Eur. Court HR (Grand Chamber), López Ribalda v. Spain, nos. 1874/13 and 8567/13 (2019).
Eur. Court HR, Gaughran v. United Kingdom, no. 45245/15 (2020).
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 11 / 11
