EN
Article 2.
Material scope
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
www.data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com
info@data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Article 2.
1. This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data wholly or partly by automated means and to the
processing other than by automated means of personal data which form part of a filing system or are intended to
form part of a filing system.
Recitals
(15) In order to prevent creating a serious risk of circumvention, the protection of natural persons should be technologically neutral
and should not depend on the techniques used. The protection of natural persons should apply to the processing of personal data by
automated means, as well as to manual processing, if the personal data are contained or are intended to be contained in a filing
system. Files or sets of files, as well as their cover pages, which are not structured according to specific criteria should not fall within
the scope of this Regulation.
Guidelines & Case Law
Documents
ICO, Frequently asked questions and answers about relevant filing systems, (2011).
Case Law
CJEU, Jehovan todistajat, C-25/17 (2018).
2. This Regulation does not apply to the processing of personal data:
(a) in the course of an activity which falls outside the scope of Union law;
Recitals
(16) This Regulation does not apply to issues of protection of fundamental rights and freedoms or the free flow of personal data
related to activities which fall outside the scope of Union law, such as activities concerning national security. This Regulation does
not apply to the processing of personal data by the Member States when carrying out activities in relation to the common foreign and
security policy of the Union.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 2 / 8
www.gdpr-text.com/en
(b) by the Member States when carrying out activities which fall within the scope of Chapter 2 of Title V of the
TEU;
(c) by a natural person in the course of a purely personal or household activity;
Recitals
(18) This Regulation does not apply to the processing of personal data by a natural person in the course of a purely personal or
household activity and thus with no connection to a professional or commercial activity. Personal or household activities could
include correspondence and the holding of addresses, or social networking and online activity undertaken within the context of such
activities. However, this Regulation applies to controllers or processors which provide the means for processing personal data for
such personal or household activities.
Guidelines & Case Law
Documents
EDPB, Guidelines 3/2019 on Processing of Personal Data through Video Devices (2020).
(d) by competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal
offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to
public security.
Recitals
(19) The protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data by competent authorities for the purposes of the
prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the
safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security and the free movement of such data, is the subject of a specific
Union legal act. This Regulation should not, therefore, apply to processing activities for those purposes. However, personal data
processed by public authorities under this Regulation should, when used for those purposes, be governed by a more specific Union
legal act, namely Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the European Parliament and of the Council [7]. Member States may entrust competent
authorities within the meaning of Directive (EU) 2016/680 with tasks which are not necessarily carried out for the purposes of the
prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the
safeguarding against and prevention of threats to public security, so that the processing of personal data for those other purposes, in
so far as it is within the scope of Union law, falls within the scope of this Regulation.
With regard to the processing of personal data by those competent authorities for purposes falling within scope of this Regulation,
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 3 / 8
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Member States should be able to maintain or introduce more specific provisions to adapt the application of the rules of this
Regulation. Such provisions may determine more precisely specific requirements for the processing of personal data by those
competent authorities for those other purposes, taking into account the constitutional, organisational and administrative structure of
the respective Member State. When the processing of personal data by private bodies falls within the scope of this Regulation, this
Regulation should provide for the possibility for Member States under specific conditions to restrict by law certain obligations and
rights when such a restriction constitutes a necessary and proportionate measure in a democratic society to safeguard specific
important interests including public security and the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the
execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security. This is relevant for
instance in the framework of anti-money laundering or the activities of forensic laboratories. 
[7] Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons
with regard to the processing of personal data by competent authorities for the purposes of prevention, investigation, detection or
prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, and the free movement of such data and repealing Council
Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA (see page 89 of this Official Journal). 
3. For the processing of personal data by the Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies, Regulation (EC) No
45/2001 applies. Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and other Union legal acts applicable to such processing of personal
data shall be adapted to the principles and rules of this Regulation in accordance with Article 98.
Recitals
(17) Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council [6] applies to the processing of personal data by the
Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies. Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and other Union legal acts applicable to such processing
of personal data should be adapted to the principles and rules established in this Regulation and applied in the light of this Regulation.
In order to provide a strong and coherent data protection framework in the Union, the necessary adaptations of Regulation (EC)
No 45/2001 should follow after the adoption of this Regulation, in order to allow application at the same time as this Regulation.
[6] Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2000 on the protection of
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the Community institutions and bodies and on the free movement of
such data (OJ L 8, 12.1.2001, p. 1). https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/AUTO/?uri=OJ:L:2001:008:TOC
(172) The European Data Protection Supervisor was consulted in accordance with Article 28(2) of Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and
delivered an opinion on 7 March 2012 [17].
[17] OJ C 192, 30.6.2012, p. 7. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/AUTO/?uri=OJ:C:2012:192:TOC
4. This Regulation shall be without prejudice to the application of Directive 2000/31/EC, in particular of the
liability rules of intermediary service providers in Articles 12 to 15 of that Directive.
Recitals
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 4 / 8
www.gdpr-text.com/en
(21) This Regulation is without prejudice to the application of Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council [8], in particular of the liability rules of intermediary service providers in Articles 12 to 15 of that Directive. That Directive
seeks to contribute to the proper functioning of the internal market by ensuring the free movement of information society services
between Member States.
[8] Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2000 on certain legal aspects of information
society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the Internal Market (‘Directive on electronic commerce’) (OJ L 178,
17.7.2000, p. 1). https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/AUTO/?uri=OJ:L:2000:178:TOC
General Data Protection Regulation (EU GDPR)
The latest consolidated version of the Regulation with corrections by Corrigendum, OJ L 127, 23.5.2018, p. 2
((EU) 2016/679). Source: EUR-lex.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 5 / 8
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Related information Article 2. Material scope
Recitals
(14) The protection afforded by this Regulation should apply to natural persons, whatever their nationality or place of
residence, in relation to the processing of their personal data. This Regulation does not cover the processing of
personal data which concerns legal persons and in particular undertakings established as legal persons, including the
name and the form of the legal person and the contact details of the legal person.
(15) In order to prevent creating a serious risk of circumvention, the protection of natural persons should be
technologically neutral and should not depend on the techniques used. The protection of natural persons should apply
to the processing of personal data by automated means, as well as to manual processing, if the personal data are
contained or are intended to be contained in a filing system. Files or sets of files, as well as their cover pages, which
are not structured according to specific criteria should not fall within the scope of this Regulation.
(16) This Regulation does not apply to issues of protection of fundamental rights and freedoms or the free flow of
personal data related to activities which fall outside the scope of Union law, such as activities concerning national
security. This Regulation does not apply to the processing of personal data by the Member States when carrying out
activities in relation to the common foreign and security policy of the Union.
(17) Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council [6] applies to the processing of
personal data by the Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies. Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and other Union
legal acts applicable to such processing of personal data should be adapted to the principles and rules established in
this Regulation and applied in the light of this Regulation. In order to provide a strong and coherent data protection
framework in the Union, the necessary adaptations of Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 should follow after the adoption
of this Regulation, in order to allow application at the same time as this Regulation.
[6] Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2000 on the
protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the Community institutions and bodies and
on
the
free
movement
of
such
data
(OJ
L
8,
12.1.2001,
p.
1).
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/AUTO/?uri=OJ:L:2001:008:TOC
(18) This Regulation does not apply to the processing of personal data by a natural person in the course of a purely
personal or household activity and thus with no connection to a professional or commercial activity. Personal or
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 6 / 8
www.gdpr-text.com/en
household activities could include correspondence and the holding of addresses, or social networking and online
activity undertaken within the context of such activities. However, this Regulation applies to controllers or processors
which provide the means for processing personal data for such personal or household activities.
(19) The protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data by competent authorities for the
purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal
penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security and the free movement
of such data, is the subject of a specific Union legal act. This Regulation should not, therefore, apply to processing
activities for those purposes. However, personal data processed by public authorities under this Regulation should,
when used for those purposes, be governed by a more specific Union legal act, namely Directive (EU) 2016/680 of
the European Parliament and of the Council [7]. Member States may entrust competent authorities within the
meaning of Directive (EU) 2016/680 with tasks which are not necessarily carried out for the purposes of the
prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties,
including the safeguarding against and prevention of threats to public security, so that the processing of personal data
for those other purposes, in so far as it is within the scope of Union law, falls within the scope of this Regulation.
With regard to the processing of personal data by those competent authorities for purposes falling within scope of
this Regulation, Member States should be able to maintain or introduce more specific provisions to adapt the
application of the rules of this Regulation. Such provisions may determine more precisely specific requirements for
the processing of personal data by those competent authorities for those other purposes, taking into account the
constitutional, organisational and administrative structure of the respective Member State. When the processing of
personal data by private bodies falls within the scope of this Regulation, this Regulation should provide for the
possibility for Member States under specific conditions to restrict by law certain obligations and rights when such a
restriction constitutes a necessary and proportionate measure in a democratic society to safeguard specific important
interests including public security and the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or
the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security.
This is relevant for instance in the framework of anti-money laundering or the activities of forensic laboratories.
[7] Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of
natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data by competent authorities for the purposes of
prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, and the
free movement of such data and repealing Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA (see page 89 of this Official
Journal). 
(20) While this Regulation applies, inter alia, to the activities of courts and other judicial authorities, Union or
Member State law could specify the processing operations and processing procedures in relation to the processing of
personal data by courts and other judicial authorities. The competence of the supervisory authorities should not cover
the processing of personal data when courts are acting in their judicial capacity, in order to safeguard the
independence of the judiciary in the performance of its judicial tasks, including decision-making. It should be
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 7 / 8
www.gdpr-text.com/en
possible to entrust supervision of such data processing operations to specific bodies within the judicial system of the
Member State, which should, in particular ensure compliance with the rules of this Regulation, enhance awareness
among members of the judiciary of their obligations under this Regulation and handle complaints in relation to such
data processing operations.
(21) This Regulation is without prejudice to the application of Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and
of the Council [8], in particular of the liability rules of intermediary service providers in Articles 12 to 15 of that
Directive. That Directive seeks to contribute to the proper functioning of the internal market by ensuring the free
movement of information society services between Member States.
[8] Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2000 on certain legal aspects of
information society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the Internal Market (‘Directive on electronic
commerce’)
(OJ
L
178,
17.7.2000,
p.
1).
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/AUTO/?uri=OJ:L:2000:178:TOC
Guidelines & Case Law
Documents
EDPB, Guidelines 3/2018 on the Territorial Scope of the GDPR (2019).
WP29, Opinion 5/2009 on online social networking (2009).
Case Law
CJEC, Criminal proceedings against Bodil Lindqvist, C-101/01 (2003).
CJEC, Tietosuojavaltuutettu/Satakunnan Markkinapörssi Oy and Satamedia Oy, C-73/07 (2008).
CJEU, Ryneš/Úřad pro ochranu osobních údajů, C-212/13 (2014).
CJEU, Tietosuojavaltuutettu/Jehovan todistajat – uskonnollinen yhdyskunta, C-25/17 (2018).
CJEU, La Quadrature du Net et al./Premier ministre et al., C-511/18, C-512/18, C-520/18 (2020).
CJEU, Privacy International/Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, C-623/17 (2020).
CJEU, Data Protection Commissioner/Facebook Ireland Ltd and Schrems, C-311/18 (2020).
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 8 / 8
