EN
Article 11.
Processing which does not require identification
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
www.data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com
info@data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Article 11.
1. If the purposes for which a controller processes personal data do not or do no longer require the identification of
a data subject by the controller, the controller shall not be obliged to maintain, acquire or process additional
information in order to identify the data subject for the sole purpose of complying with this Regulation.
2. Where, in cases referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the controller is able to demonstrate that it is not in a
position to identify the data subject, the controller shall inform the data subject accordingly, if possible. In such
cases, Articles 15 to 20 shall not apply except where the data subject, for the purpose of exercising his or her
rights under those articles, provides additional information enabling his or her identification.
General Data Protection Regulation (EU GDPR)
The latest consolidated version of the Regulation with corrections by Corrigendum, OJ L 127, 23.5.2018, p. 2
((EU) 2016/679). Source: EUR-lex.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 2 / 3
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Related information Article 11. Processing which does not require
identification
Recitals
(57) If the personal data processed by a controller do not permit the controller to identify a natural person, the data
controller should not be obliged to acquire additional information in order to identify the data subject for the sole
purpose of complying with any provision of this Regulation. However, the controller should not refuse to take
additional information provided by the data subject in order to support the exercise of his or her rights. Identification
should include the digital identification of a data subject, for example through authentication mechanism such as the
same credentials, used by the data subject to log-in to the on-line service offered by the data controller.
(64) The controller should use all reasonable measures to verify the identity of a data subject who requests access, in
particular in the context of online services and online identifiers. A controller should not retain personal data for the
sole purpose of being able to react to potential requests.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 3 / 3
