EN
Article 17.
Right to erasure (‘right to be forgotten’)
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
www.data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com
info@data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Article 17.
1. The data subject shall have the right to obtain from the controller the erasure of personal data concerning him or
her without undue delay and the controller shall have the obligation to erase personal data without undue delay
where one of the following grounds applies:
(a) the personal data are no longer necessary in relation to the purposes for which they were collected or otherwise
processed;
(b) the data subject withdraws consent on which the processing is based according to point (a) of Article 6(1), or
point (a) of Article 9(2), and where there is no other legal ground for the processing;
(c) the data subject objects to the processing pursuant to Article 21(1) and there are no overriding legitimate
grounds for the processing, or the data subject objects to the processing pursuant to Article 21(2);
(d) the personal data have been unlawfully processed;
(e) the personal data have to be erased for compliance with a legal obligation in Union or Member State law to
which the controller is subject;
(f) the personal data have been collected in relation to the offer of information society services referred to in
Article 8(1).
2. Where the controller has made the personal data public and is obliged pursuant to paragraph 1 to erase the
personal data, the controller, taking account of available technology and the cost of implementation, shall take
reasonable steps, including technical measures, to inform controllers which are processing the personal data that
the data subject has requested the erasure by such controllers of any links to, or copy or replication of, those
personal data.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to the extent that processing is necessary:
(a) for exercising the right of freedom of expression and information;
(b) for compliance with a legal obligation which requires processing by Union or Member State law to which the
controller is subject or for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 2 / 5
www.gdpr-text.com/en
authority vested in the controller;
(c) for reasons of public interest in the area of public health in accordance with points (h) and (i) of Article 9(2) as
well as Article 9(3);
(d) for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or statistical purposes in
accordance with Article 89(1) in so far as the right referred to in paragraph 1 is likely to render impossible or
seriously impair the achievement of the objectives of that processing; or
(e) for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims.
General Data Protection Regulation (EU GDPR)
The latest consolidated version of the Regulation with corrections by Corrigendum, OJ L 127, 23.5.2018, p. 2
((EU) 2016/679). Source: EUR-lex.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 3 / 5
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Related information Article 17. Right to erasure (‘right to be
forgotten’)
Recitals
(65) A data subject should have the right to have personal data concerning him or her rectified and a ‘right to be
forgotten’ where the retention of such data infringes this Regulation or Union or Member State law to which the
controller is subject. In particular, a data subject should have the right to have his or her personal data erased and no
longer processed where the personal data are no longer necessary in relation to the purposes for which they are
collected or otherwise processed, where a data subject has withdrawn his or her consent or objects to the processing
of personal data concerning him or her, or where the processing of his or her personal data does not otherwise comply
with this Regulation. That right is relevant in particular where the data subject has given his or her consent as a child
and is not fully aware of the risks involved by the processing, and later wants to remove such personal data, especially
on the internet. The data subject should be able to exercise that right notwithstanding the fact that he or she is no
longer a child. However, the further retention of the personal data should be lawful where it is necessary, for
exercising the right of freedom of expression and information, for compliance with a legal obligation, for the
performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller,
on the grounds of public interest in the area of public health, for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific
or historical research purposes or statistical purposes, or for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims.
(66) To strengthen the right to be forgotten in the online environment, the right to erasure should also be extended in
such a way that a controller who has made the personal data public should be obliged to inform the controllers which
are processing such personal data to erase any links to, or copies or replications of those personal data. In doing so,
that controller should take reasonable steps, taking into account available technology and the means available to the
controller, including technical measures, to inform the controllers which are processing the personal data of the data
subject's request.
Guidelines & Case Law
Documents
Article 29 Working Party, Guidelines on the Implementation of the Court of Justice of the European Union Judgment
on Google Spain Inc. v. Agencia Española de protección de datos (AEPD) and Mario Costeja González C-131/12
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 4 / 5
www.gdpr-text.com/en
(2014).
EDPB, Guidelines 5/2019 on the Criteria of the Right to be Forgotten in the Search Engines Cases under the GDPR (part
1) (2019).
EDPB, Guidelines 02/2021 on Virtual Voice Assistants (2021).
Case law
CJEU, Google Spain SL/Agencia española de protección de datos, C-131/12 (2014).
CJEU, Camera di Commercio, Industria, Artigianato e Agricoltura di Lecce/Manni, C-398/15 (2019).
CJEU, GC e.a./Commission nationale de l’informatique et des libertés, C-136/17 (2019).
CJEU, Google LLC/Commission nationale de l’informatique et des libertés, C-507/17 (2019).
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 5 / 5
