EN
Article 21.
Right to object
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
www.data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com
info@data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Article 21.
1. The data subject shall have the right to object, on grounds relating to his or her particular situation, at any time
to processing of personal data concerning him or her which is based on point (e) or (f) of Article 6(1), including
profiling based on those provisions. The controller shall no longer process the personal data unless the controller
demonstrates compelling legitimate grounds for the processing which override the interests, rights and freedoms of
the data subject or for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims.
Recitals
(69) Where personal data might lawfully be processed because processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in
the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller, or on grounds of the legitimate interests of a
controller or a third party, a data subject should, nevertheless, be entitled to object to the processing of any personal data relating to
his or her particular situation. It should be for the controller to demonstrate that its compelling legitimate interest overrides the
interests or the fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject.
Expert commentary
Author
Siarhei Varankevich
  CIPP/E, CIPM, CIPT, MBA, FIP
  Co-Founder & CEO of Data Privacy Office LLC.
Data Protection Trainer and Principal Consultant
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 2 / 6
www.gdpr-text.com/en
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 3 / 6
www.gdpr-text.com/en
2. Where personal data are processed for direct marketing purposes, the data subject shall have the right to object
at any time to processing of personal data concerning him or her for such marketing, which includes profiling to
the extent that it is related to such direct marketing.
3. Where the data subject objects to processing for direct marketing purposes, the personal data shall no longer be
processed for such purposes.
Recitals
(70) Where personal data are processed for the purposes of direct marketing, the data subject should have the right to object to such
processing, including profiling to the extent that it is related to such direct marketing, whether with regard to initial or further
processing, at any time and free of charge. That right should be explicitly brought to the attention of the data subject and presented
clearly and separately from any other information.
4. At the latest at the time of the first communication with the data subject, the right referred to in paragraphs 1
and 2 shall be explicitly brought to the attention of the data subject and shall be presented clearly and separately
from any other information.
5. In the context of the use of information society services, and notwithstanding Directive 2002/58/EC, the data
subject may exercise his or her right to object by automated means using technical specifications.
6. Where personal data are processed for scientific or historical research purposes or statistical purposes pursuant
to Article 89(1), the data subject, on grounds relating to his or her particular situation, shall have the right to object
to processing of personal data concerning him or her, unless the processing is necessary for the performance of a
task carried out for reasons of public interest.
General Data Protection Regulation (EU GDPR)
The latest consolidated version of the Regulation with corrections by Corrigendum, OJ L 127, 23.5.2018, p. 2
((EU) 2016/679). Source: EUR-lex.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 4 / 6
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Related information Article 21. Right to object
Expert commentary
Data Subject Request Letter Sample
Concern: Request to stop processing my personal data
Dear Madam, Dear Sir,
You have data concerning me that I am asking you to stop processing.
Pursuant to Article 21(1) of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),
please stop processing my personal data [to perform a task carried out in the
public interest, according to Article 6(1)(e) of the GDPR] [based on a
legitimate interest, according to Article 6(1)(f) of the GDPR].
In consequence, I ask you to delete my personal data and notify every
recipient to whom you have disclosed my personal data, pursuant to Articles
17(1)(c) and 19 of the GDPR.
Thank you for confirming as soon as possible that you stop processing my
personal data, and in any event within one month of the receipt of my
request, according to Article 12(3) of the GDPR.
In the absence of any action taken upon my request in a timely manner, I
reserve my right to lodge a complaint with the relevant supervisory authority
and seek judicial remedy.
Sincerely,
Data Subject
Author
Louis-Philippe Gratton
  PhD, LLM
  Privacy Expert
Recitals
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 5 / 6
www.gdpr-text.com/en
(69) Where personal data might lawfully be processed because processing is necessary for the performance of a task
carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller, or on grounds of the
legitimate interests of a controller or a third party, a data subject should, nevertheless, be entitled to object to the
processing of any personal data relating to his or her particular situation. It should be for the controller to demonstrate
that its compelling legitimate interest overrides the interests or the fundamental rights and freedoms of the data
subject.
(70) Where personal data are processed for the purposes of direct marketing, the data subject should have the right to
object to such processing, including profiling to the extent that it is related to such direct marketing, whether with
regard to initial or further processing, at any time and free of charge. That right should be explicitly brought to the
attention of the data subject and presented clearly and separately from any other information.
Guidelines & Case Law
Documents
EDPB, Guidelines 3/2019 on Processing of Personal Data through Video Devices (2020).
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 6 / 6
