EN
Article 8.
Conditions applicable to child's consent in relation to information
society services
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
www.data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com
info@data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Article 8.
1. Where point (a) of Article 6(1) applies, in relation to the offer of information society services directly to a
child, the processing of the personal data of a child shall be lawful where the child is at least 16 years old. Where
the child is below the age of 16 years, such processing shall be lawful only if and to the extent that consent is given
or authorised by the holder of parental responsibility over the child.
Guidelines & Case Law
Documents
Article 29 Working Party, Guidelines on Consent under Regulation 2016/679 (2018).
The inclusion of the wording ‘offered directly to a child’ indicates that Article 8 is intended to apply to some, not all
information society services. In this respect, if an information society service provider makes it clear to potential users that it
is only offering its service to persons aged 18 or over, and this is not undermined by other evidence (such as the content of the
site or marketing plans) then the service will not be considered to be ‘offered directly to a child’ and Article 8 will not apply.
Article 29 Working Party, Guidelines on transparency under Regulation 2016/679 (2018).
Where a data controller is targeting children[16] or is, or should be, aware that their goods/services are particularly utilised by
children (including where the controller is relying on the consent of the child)[17], it should ensure that the vocabulary, tone
and style of the language used is appropriate to and resonates with children so that the child addressee of the information
recognises that the message/ information is being directed at them.[18] A useful example of child-centred language used as an
alternative to the original legal language can be found in the “UN Convention on the Rights of the Child in Child Friendly
Language”.[19]
Member States may provide by law for a lower age for those purposes provided that such lower age is not below
13 years.
2. The controller shall make reasonable efforts to verify in such cases that consent is given or authorised by the
holder of parental responsibility over the child, taking into consideration available technology.
Guidelines & Case Law
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 2 / 4
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Article 29 Working Party, Guidelines on Consent under Regulation 2016/679, WP259 rev.01 (2018):
What is reasonable, both in terms of verifying that a user is old enough to provide their own consent, and in terms of verifying
that a person providing consent on behalf of a child is a holder of parental responsibility, may depend upon the risks inherent
in the processing as well as the available technology. In low-risk cases, verification of parental responsibility via email may be
sufficient. Conversely, in high-risk cases, it may be appropriate to ask for more proof, so that the controller is able to verify
and retain the information pursuant to Article 7(1) GDPR. Trusted third party verification services may offer solutions which
minimise the amount of personal data the controller has to process itself.
 
3. Paragraph 1 shall not affect the general contract law of Member States such as the rules on the validity,
formation or effect of a contract in relation to a child.
General Data Protection Regulation (EU GDPR)
The latest consolidated version of the Regulation with corrections by Corrigendum, OJ L 127, 23.5.2018, p. 2
((EU) 2016/679). Source: EUR-lex.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 3 / 4
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Related information Article 8. Conditions applicable to child's
consent in relation to information society services
Recitals
(38) Children merit specific protection with regard to their personal data, as they may be less aware of the risks,
consequences and safeguards concerned and their rights in relation to the processing of personal data. Such specific
protection should, in particular, apply to the use of personal data of children for the purposes of marketing or creating
personality or user profiles and the collection of personal data with regard to children when using services offered
directly to a child. The consent of the holder of parental responsibility should not be necessary in the context of
preventive or counselling services offered directly to a child.
Guidelines & Case Law
Documents
Article 29 Working Party, Opinion 2/2009 on the Protection of Children’s Personal Data (General Guidelines and the
Special Case of Schools) (2009).
EDPB, Guidelines 5/2020 on Consent under Regulation 2016/679 (2020).
ICO, Age Appropriate Design: A Code of Practice for Online Services (2020).
Case Law
CJEU, Data Protection Commissioner/Facebook Ireland Ltd and Schrems, C-311/18 (2020).
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 4 / 4
