EN
Article 12.
Transparent information, communication and modalities for the
exercise of the rights of the data subject
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
www.data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com
info@data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Article 12.
1. The controller shall take appropriate measures to provide any information referred to in Articles 13 and 14 and
any communication under Articles 15 to 22 and 34 relating to processing to the data subject in a concise,
transparent, intelligible and easily accessible form, using clear and plain language, in particular for any information
addressed specifically to a child. The information shall be provided in writing, or by other means, including, where
appropriate, by electronic means. When requested by the data subject, the information may be provided orally,
provided that the identity of the data subject is proven by other means.
Recitals
(58) The principle of transparency requires that any information addressed to the public or to the data subject be concise, easily
accessible and easy to understand, and that clear and plain language and, additionally, where appropriate, visualisation be used. Such
information could be provided in electronic form, for example, when addressed to the public, through a website. This is of particular
relevance in situations where the proliferation of actors and the technological complexity of practice make it difficult for the data
subject to know and understand whether, by whom and for what purpose personal data relating to him or her are being collected, such
as in the case of online advertising. Given that children merit specific protection, any information and communication, where
processing is addressed to a child, should be in such a clear and plain language that the child can easily understand.
Guidelines & Case Law
Documents
Article 29 Working Party, Opinion 2/2010 on behavioural advertising (2010):
The obligation to provide the necessary information and obtain data subjects’ consent ultimately lies with the entity that sends
and reads the cookie. In most cases, this is the ad network provider. When publishers are joint-controllers, for example in
those cases where they transfer directly identifiable information to ad network providers, they are also bound by the
obligation to provide information to data subjects about the data processing.
2. The controller shall facilitate the exercise of data subject rights under Articles 15 to 22. In the cases referred to
in Article 11(2), the controller shall not refuse to act on the request of the data subject for exercising his or her
rights under Articles 15 to 22, unless the controller demonstrates that it is not in a position to identify the data
subject.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 2 / 6
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Recitals
(59) Modalities should be provided for facilitating the exercise of the data subject's rights under this Regulation, including
mechanisms to request and, if applicable, obtain, free of charge, in particular, access to and rectification or erasure of personal data
and the exercise of the right to object. The controller should also provide means for requests to be made electronically, especially
where personal data are processed by electronic means. The controller should be obliged to respond to requests from the data subject
without undue delay and at the latest within one month and to give reasons where the controller does not intend to comply with any
such requests.
(64) The controller should use all reasonable measures to verify the identity of a data subject who requests access, in particular in the
context of online services and online identifiers. A controller should not retain personal data for the sole purpose of being able to
react to potential requests.
Guidelines & Case Law
Documents
Spanish Data Protection Agency (AEPD), Guide on use of cookies (2021).
3. The controller shall provide information on action taken on a request under Articles 15 to 22 to the data subject
without undue delay and in any event within one month of receipt of the request. That period may be extended by
two further months where necessary, taking into account the complexity and number of the requests. The
controller shall inform the data subject of any such extension within one month of receipt of the request, together
with the reasons for the delay. Where the data subject makes the request by electronic form means, the
information shall be provided by electronic means where possible, unless otherwise requested by the data subject.
4. If the controller does not take action on the request of the data subject, the controller shall inform the data
subject without delay and at the latest within one month of receipt of the request of the reasons for not taking
action and on the possibility of lodging a complaint with a supervisory authority and seeking a judicial remedy.
5. Information provided under Articles 13 and 14 and any communication and any actions taken under Articles 15
to 22 and 34 shall be provided free of charge. Where requests from a data subject are manifestly unfounded or
excessive, in particular because of their repetitive character, the controller may either:
(a) charge a reasonable fee taking into account the administrative costs of providing the information or
communication or taking the action requested; or
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 3 / 6
www.gdpr-text.com/en
(b) refuse to act on the request.
The controller shall bear the burden of demonstrating the manifestly unfounded or excessive character of the
request.
6. Without prejudice to Article 11, where the controller has reasonable doubts concerning the identity of the
natural person making the request referred to in Articles 15 to 21, the controller may request the provision of
additional information necessary to confirm the identity of the data subject.
7. The information to be provided to data subjects pursuant to Articles 13 and 14 may be provided in combination
with standardised icons in order to give in an easily visible, intelligible and clearly legible manner a meaningful
overview of the intended processing. Where the icons are presented electronically they shall be machine-readable.
8. The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 92 for the purpose of
determining the information to be presented by the icons and the procedures for providing standardised icons.
General Data Protection Regulation (EU GDPR)
The latest consolidated version of the Regulation with corrections by Corrigendum, OJ L 127, 23.5.2018, p. 2
((EU) 2016/679). Source: EUR-lex.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 4 / 6
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Related information Article 12. Transparent information,
communication and modalities for the exercise of the rights of the
data subject
Recitals
(58) The principle of transparency requires that any information addressed to the public or to the data subject be
concise, easily accessible and easy to understand, and that clear and plain language and, additionally, where
appropriate, visualisation be used. Such information could be provided in electronic form, for example, when
addressed to the public, through a website. This is of particular relevance in situations where the proliferation of
actors and the technological complexity of practice make it difficult for the data subject to know and understand
whether, by whom and for what purpose personal data relating to him or her are being collected, such as in the case
of online advertising. Given that children merit specific protection, any information and communication, where
processing is addressed to a child, should be in such a clear and plain language that the child can easily understand.
(59) Modalities should be provided for facilitating the exercise of the data subject's rights under this Regulation,
including mechanisms to request and, if applicable, obtain, free of charge, in particular, access to and rectification or
erasure of personal data and the exercise of the right to object. The controller should also provide means for requests
to be made electronically, especially where personal data are processed by electronic means. The controller should be
obliged to respond to requests from the data subject without undue delay and at the latest within one month and to
give reasons where the controller does not intend to comply with any such requests.
(64) The controller should use all reasonable measures to verify the identity of a data subject who requests access, in
particular in the context of online services and online identifiers. A controller should not retain personal data for the
sole purpose of being able to react to potential requests.
Guidelines & Case Law
Document
Article 29 Working Party, Guidelines on Transparency Under Regulation 2016/679 (2018).
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 5 / 6
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Information Commissioner’s Office, Right of Access (2020).
European Commission, Guidance on Apps supporting the fight against COVID 19 pandemic in relation to data
protection Brussels (2020).
EDPB, Guidelines 02/2021 on Virtual Voice Assistants (2021).
Case Law
CJEU, Smaranda Bara e.a./Președintele Casei Naționale de Asigurări de Sănătate, C-201/14 (2015).
ECHR, López Ribalda v. Spain, nos 1874/13 and 8567/13 (2019).
Belgian DPA Fines Belgian Telecommunications Provider for Several Data Protection Infringements (2020) – brief
description in English.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 6 / 6
