EN
Article 19.
Notification obligation regarding rectification or erasure of
personal data or restriction of processing
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
www.data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com
info@data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Article 19.
The controller shall communicate any rectification or erasure of personal data or restriction of processing carried
out in accordance with Article 16, Article 17(1) and Article 18 to each recipient to whom the personal data have
been disclosed, unless this proves impossible or involves disproportionate effort. The controller shall inform the
data subject about those recipients if the data subject requests it.
General Data Protection Regulation (EU GDPR)
The latest consolidated version of the Regulation with corrections by Corrigendum, OJ L 127, 23.5.2018, p. 2
((EU) 2016/679). Source: EUR-lex.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 2 / 4
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Related information Article 19. Notification obligation regarding
rectification or erasure of personal data or restriction of processing
Expert commentary
Article 19 includes a notification obligation, which should not be confused
with the specific personal data breach notification obligation (article 33). It
is a mechanism that gives full effect to other provisions of the General Data
Protection Regulation, ensuring that third parties are informed about actions
taken by the controller regarding personal data (recital 66).
After a person has exercised her/his right to rectification (article 16),
erasure (article 17) or restriction of processing (article 18), the controller
must inform all parties (“recipients”) to whom s/he has disclosed data. The
provision should be read as referring to all forms of communication of
personal data, like “disclosure by transmission, dissemination or otherwise
making available” [article 4 (2)]. The recipient identified in the text of the
provision comprises natural or legal persons, public authorities, agencies or
bodies [article 4 (9)]. They are not limited to external parties, they
encompass in-house persons, departments or services.
There is a limit to the general obligation imposed on the controller to inform
recipients: her/his responsibility ends where it proves impossible to do so or
it involves “disproportionate effort” on her/his part. Articles 14 (5) b) and 34
(3) c) of the GDPR uses the same wording (“disproportionate effort”), but
the Court of Justice of the European Union did not interpret the meaning of
the expression yet.
However, the Court of Appeal of England and Wales clarified similar
wording in the former domestic Data Protection Act 1998 [article 8(2)(a)]
before the entry into force of the GDPR. The case involved a data access
request and the “disproportionate effort” exception to refuse to comply with
the demand. The judge left it to an appreciation of facts of each particular
case to balance the effort involved in finding and supplying the information
against the potential benefit it might bring to the person requesting data
(Dawson-Damer v. Taylor Wessing LLP).
Author
Louis-Philippe Gratton
  PhD, LLM
  Privacy Expert
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 3 / 4
www.gdpr-text.com/en
The “disproportionate effort” exception of article 19 should not be read as a
way to get around the provisions of the GDPR. It should not be invoked, for
example, if the “disproportionate effort” results of the number of recipients
to whom the controller disclosed personal data. The burden of proving that
the request would involve “disproportionate effort” should rest on the
controller’s shoulders. S/he should demonstrate that s/he took “reasonable
steps” to inform recipients of personal data, “taking into account available
technology and the means available” (recital 66).
The controller should not be allowed to invoke inadequate information
management systems or poor practices to refuse to inform recipients, as they
can be viewed as a breach of her/his obligations under the GDPR to
implement data protection by design and by default (article 25).
The goal of the provision may be evaded nonetheless by the recipient as s/he
is formerly under no legal obligation to use the controller’s information. The
drafters of the European regulation seem to have ignored this scenario,
letting recipients decide whether or not they will give effect to the request of
the controller.
As the concerned person may ask to be informed about the identity of the
recipients, s/he may have to exercise her/his rights to rectification, erasure or
restriction of processing by contacting directly each identified recipient. It
would be a shift in the notification obligation from the controller to the data
subject, although the latter has not decided to share her/his information with
other recipients.
Guidelines & Case Law
Case Law
England and Wales Court of Appeal (EWCA), Dawson-Damer v. Taylor Wessing LLP, EWCA Civ 74 (2017).
 
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 4 / 4
