EN
Article 6.
Lawfulness of processing
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
www.data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com
info@data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Article 6.
1. Processing shall be lawful only if and to the extent that at least one of the following applies:
(a) the data subject has given consent to the processing of his or her personal data for one or more specific
purposes;
Guidelines & Case Law
WP29, Guidelines on consent under Regulation 2016/679 (2018).
EDPB, Guidelines 8/2020 on the targeting of social media users (2020).
EDPB, Guidelines 3/2020 on the Processing of Data Concerning Health for the Purpose of Scientific Research in the Context of the
Covid-19 Outbreak (2020).
EDPB, Guidelines 3/2019 on Processing of Personal Data through Video Devices (2020).
(b) processing is necessary for the performance of a contract to which the data subject is party or in order to take
steps at the request of the data subject prior to entering into a contract;
Recitals
(44) Processing should be lawful where it is necessary in the context of a contract or the intention to enter into a contract.
Guidelines & Case Law
EDPB, Guidelines 2/2019 on the Processing of Personal Data under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in the Context of the Provision of Online
Services to Data Subjects (2019).
EDPB, Guidelines 06/2020 on the interplay of the Second Payment Services Directive and the GDPR (2020).
Payment services are always provided on a contractual basis between the payment services user and the payment services
provider.
Controllers have to assess what processing of personal data is objectively necessary to perform the contract. Justification of the
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 2 / 13
www.gdpr-text.com/en
necessity is dependent on:
the nature of the service;
the mutual perspectives and expectations of the parties to the contract;
the rationale of the contract; and
the essential elements of the contract.
The controller should be able to demonstrate how the main object of the specific contract with the data subject cannot be
performed if the specific processing of the personal data in question does not occur. Merely referencing or mentioning data
processing in a contract is not enough to bring the processing in question within the scope of Article 6(1)(b) of the GDPR.
(c) processing is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to which the controller is subject;
Recitals
(45) Where processing is carried out in accordance with a legal obligation to which the controller is subject or where processing is
necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority, the processing should
have a basis in Union or Member State law. This Regulation does not require a specific law for each individual processing. A law as a
basis for several processing operations based on a legal obligation to which the controller is subject or where processing is necessary
for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of an official authority may be sufficient. It should
also be for Union or Member State law to determine the purpose of processing. Furthermore, that law could specify the general
conditions of this Regulation governing the lawfulness of personal data processing, establish specifications for determining the
controller, the type of personal data which are subject to the processing, the data subjects concerned, the entities to which the
personal data may be disclosed, the purpose limitations, the storage period and other measures to ensure lawful and fair processing. It
should also be for Union or Member State law to determine whether the controller performing a task carried out in the public interest
or in the exercise of official authority should be a public authority or another natural or legal person governed by public law, or,
where it is in the public interest to do so, including for health purposes such as public health and social protection and the
management of health care services, by private law, such as a professional association.
(d) processing is necessary in order to protect the vital interests of the data subject or of another natural person;
Recitals
(46) The processing of personal data should also be regarded to be lawful where it is necessary to protect an interest which is essential
for the life of the data subject or that of another natural person. Processing of personal data based on the vital interest of another
natural person should in principle take place only where the processing cannot be manifestly based on another legal basis. Some types
of processing may serve both important grounds of public interest and the vital interests of the data subject as for instance when
processing is necessary for humanitarian purposes, including for monitoring epidemics and their spread or in situations of
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 3 / 13
www.gdpr-text.com/en
humanitarian emergencies, in particular in situations of natural and man-made disasters.
(e) processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of
official authority vested in the controller;
Recitals
(115) Some third countries adopt laws, regulations and other legal acts which purport to directly regulate the processing activities of
natural and legal persons under the jurisdiction of the Member States. This may include judgments of courts or tribunals or decisions
of administrative authorities in third countries requiring a controller or processor to transfer or disclose personal data, and which are
not based on an international agreement, such as a mutual legal assistance treaty, in force between the requesting third country and the
Union or a Member State. The extraterritorial application of those laws, regulations and other legal acts may be in breach of
international law and may impede the attainment of the protection of natural persons ensured in the Union by this Regulation.
Transfers should only be allowed where the conditions of this Regulation for a transfer to third countries are met. This may be the
case, inter alia, where disclosure is necessary for an important ground of public interest recognised in Union or Member State law to
which the controller is subject.
Guidelines & Case Law
EDPB, Guidelines on the use of location data and contact tracing tools in the context of the COVID-19 outbreak (2020).
EDPB, Guidelines 3/2019 on Processing of Personal Data through Video Devices (2020).
(f) processing is necessary for the purposes of the legitimate interests pursued by the controller or by a third party,
except where such interests are overridden by the interests or fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject
which require protection of personal data, in particular where the data subject is a child.
Recitals
(47) The legitimate interests of a controller, including those of a controller to which the personal data may be disclosed, or of a third
party, may provide a legal basis for processing, provided that the interests or the fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject
are not overriding, taking into consideration the reasonable expectations of data subjects based on their relationship with the
controller. Such legitimate interest could exist for example where there is a relevant and appropriate relationship between the data
subject and the controller in situations such as where the data subject is a client or in the service of the controller. At any rate the
existence of a legitimate interest would need careful assessment including whether a data subject can reasonably expect at the time
and in the context of the collection of the personal data that processing for that purpose may take place. The interests and
fundamental rights of the data subject could in particular override the interest of the data controller where personal data are processed
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 4 / 13
www.gdpr-text.com/en
in circumstances where data subjects do not reasonably expect further processing. Given that it is for the legislator to provide by law
for the legal basis for public authorities to process personal data, that legal basis should not apply to the processing by public
authorities in the performance of their tasks. The processing of personal data strictly necessary for the purposes of preventing fraud
also constitutes a legitimate interest of the data controller concerned. The processing of personal data for direct marketing purposes
may be regarded as carried out for a legitimate interest.
(48) Controllers that are part of a group of undertakings or institutions affiliated to a central body may have a legitimate interest in
transmitting personal data within the group of undertakings for internal administrative purposes, including the processing of clients'
or employees' personal data. The general principles for the transfer of personal data, within a group of undertakings, to an
undertaking located in a third country remain unaffected.
(49) The processing of personal data to the extent strictly necessary and proportionate for the purposes of ensuring network and
information security, i.e. the ability of a network or an information system to resist, at a given level of confidence, accidental events
or unlawful or malicious actions that compromise the availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of stored or transmitted
personal data, and the security of the related services offered by, or accessible via, those networks and systems, by public authorities,
by computer emergency response teams (CERTs), computer security incident response teams (CSIRTs), by providers of electronic
communications networks and services and by providers of security technologies and services, constitutes a legitimate interest of the
data controller concerned. This could, for example, include preventing unauthorised access to electronic communications networks
and malicious code distribution and stopping ‘denial of service’ attacks and damage to computer and electronic communication
systems. 
Guidelines & Case Law
Documents
WP29, Opinion on the “Notion of legitimate interests of the data controller under Article 7 of Directive 95/46/EC” (2014).
EDPB, Guidelines 8/2020 on the targeting of social media users (2020):
44. For what concerns the legitimate interest lawful basis, the EDPB recalls that in Fashion ID, the CJEU reiterated that in
order for processing to rely on the legitimate interest, three cumulative conditions should be met, namely
the pursuit of a legitimate interest by the data controller or by the third party or parties to whom the data are disclosed,
the need to process personal data for the purposes of the legitimate interests pursued, and
the condition that the fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject whose data require protection do not take
precedence.
The CJEU also specified that in a situation of joint controllership “it is necessary that each of those controllers should pursue a
legitimate interest […] through those processing operations in order for those operations to be justified in respect of each of
them”.
EDPB, Guidelines 3/2019 on Processing of Personal Data through Video Devices (2020).
Data Protection Commission (Ireland), Data Protection Considerations Relating to Receivership (2020).
EDPB, Guidelines 06/2020 on the interplay of the Second Payment Services Directive and the GDPR (2020).
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 5 / 13
www.gdpr-text.com/en
The GDPR may allow for the processing of silent party data when this processing is necessary for purposes of the legitimate
interests pursued by a controller or by a third party.
A lawful basis for the processing of silent party data by PISPs and AISPs – in the context of the provision of payment services
under the PSD2 – could thus be the legitimate interest of a controller or a third party to perform the contract with the payment
service user. The necessity to process personal data of the silent party is limited and determined by the reasonable expectations
of these data subjects.
Effective and appropriate measures have to be established by all parties involved. In this respect, the controller has to establish
the necessary safeguards for the processing, including technical measures. If feasible, also encryption or other techniques must
be applied to achieve an appropriate level of security and data minimisation.
Case Law
CJEU, TK v Asociaţia de Proprietari bloc M5A-ScaraA, Case C-708/18 (2018).
 
Point (f) of the first subparagraph shall not apply to processing carried out by public authorities in the performance
of their tasks.
Recitals
(40) In order for processing to be lawful, personal data should be processed on the basis of the consent of the data subject concerned
or some other legitimate basis, laid down by law, either in this Regulation or in other Union or Member State law as referred to in this
Regulation, including the necessity for compliance with the legal obligation to which the controller is subject or the necessity for the
performance of a contract to which the data subject is party or in order to take steps at the request of the data subject prior to
entering into a contract.
(50) The processing of personal data for purposes other than those for which the personal data were initially collected should be
allowed only where the processing is compatible with the purposes for which the personal data were initially collected. In such a case,
no legal basis separate from that which allowed the collection of the personal data is required. If the processing is necessary for the
performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller, Union or
Member State law may determine and specify the tasks and purposes for which the further processing should be regarded as
compatible and lawful. Further processing for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or
statistical purposes should be considered to be compatible lawful processing operations. The legal basis provided by Union or
Member State law for the processing of personal data may also provide a legal basis for further processing. In order to ascertain
whether a purpose of further processing is compatible with the purpose for which the personal data are initially collected, the
controller, after having met all the requirements for the lawfulness of the original processing, should take into account, inter alia: any
link between those purposes and the purposes of the intended further processing; the context in which the personal data have been
collected, in particular the reasonable expectations of data subjects based on their relationship with the controller as to their further
use; the nature of the personal data; the consequences of the intended further processing for data subjects; and the existence of
appropriate safeguards in both the original and intended further processing operations.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 6 / 13
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Where the data subject has given consent or the processing is based on Union or Member State law which constitutes a necessary and
proportionate measure in a democratic society to safeguard, in particular, important objectives of general public interest, the
controller should be allowed to further process the personal data irrespective of the compatibility of the purposes. In any case, the
application of the principles set out in this Regulation and in particular the information of the data subject on those other purposes
and on his or her rights including the right to object, should be ensured. Indicating possible criminal acts or threats to public security
by the controller and transmitting the relevant personal data in individual cases or in several cases relating to the same criminal act or
threats to public security to a competent authority should be regarded as being in the legitimate interest pursued by the controller.
However, such transmission in the legitimate interest of the controller or further processing of personal data should be prohibited if
the processing is not compatible with a legal, professional or other binding obligation of secrecy. 
2. Member States may maintain or introduce more specific provisions to adapt the application of the rules of this
Regulation with regard to processing for compliance with points (c) and (e) of paragraph 1 by determining more
precisely specific requirements for the processing and other measures to ensure lawful and fair processing
including for other specific processing situations as provided for in Chapter IX.
3. The basis for the processing referred to in point (c) and (e) of paragraph 1 shall be laid down by:
(a) Union law; or
(b) Member State law to which the controller is subject.
The purpose of the processing shall be determined in that legal basis or, as regards the processing referred to in
point (e) of paragraph 1, shall be necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the
exercise of official authority vested in the controller. That legal basis may contain specific provisions to adapt the
application of rules of this Regulation, inter alia: the general conditions governing the lawfulness of processing by
the controller; the types of data which are subject to the processing; the data subjects concerned; the entities to,
and the purposes for which, the personal data may be disclosed; the purpose limitation; storage periods; and
processing operations and processing procedures, including measures to ensure lawful and fair processing such as
those for other specific processing situations as provided for in Chapter IX. The Union or the Member State law
shall meet an objective of public interest and be proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued.
Recitals
(41) Where this Regulation refers to a legal basis or a legislative measure, this does not necessarily require a legislative act adopted by
a parliament, without prejudice to requirements pursuant to the constitutional order of the Member State concerned. However, such a
legal basis or legislative measure should be clear and precise and its application should be foreseeable to persons subject to it, in
accordance with the case-law of the Court of Justice of the European Union (the ‘Court of Justice’) and the European Court of
Human Rights.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 7 / 13
www.gdpr-text.com/en
4. Where the processing for a purpose other than that for which the personal data have been collected is not based
on the data subject’s consent or on a Union or Member State law which constitutes a necessary and proportionate
measure in a democratic society to safeguard the objectives referred to in Article 23(1), the controller shall, in
order to ascertain whether processing for another purpose is compatible with the purpose for which the personal
data are initially collected, take into account, inter alia:
Guidelines & Case Law
Documents
EDPB, Guidelines 3/2019 on Processing of Personal Data through Video Devices (2020).
(a) any link between the purposes for which the personal data have been collected and the purposes of the intended
further processing;
(b) the context in which the personal data have been collected, in particular regarding the relationship between
data subjects and the controller;
(c) the nature of the personal data, in particular whether special categories of personal data are processed, pursuant
to Article 9, or whether personal data related to criminal convictions and offences are processed, pursuant to
Article 10;
(d) the possible consequences of the intended further processing for data subjects;
(e) the existence of appropriate safeguards, which may include encryption or pseudonymisation.
General Data Protection Regulation (EU GDPR)
The latest consolidated version of the Regulation with corrections by Corrigendum, OJ L 127, 23.5.2018, p. 2
((EU) 2016/679). Source: EUR-lex.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 8 / 13
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Related information Article 6. Lawfulness of processing
Recitals
(40) In order for processing to be lawful, personal data should be processed on the basis of the consent of the data
subject concerned or some other legitimate basis, laid down by law, either in this Regulation or in other Union or
Member State law as referred to in this Regulation, including the necessity for compliance with the legal obligation to
which the controller is subject or the necessity for the performance of a contract to which the data subject is party or
in order to take steps at the request of the data subject prior to entering into a contract.
(41) Where this Regulation refers to a legal basis or a legislative measure, this does not necessarily require a
legislative act adopted by a parliament, without prejudice to requirements pursuant to the constitutional order of the
Member State concerned. However, such a legal basis or legislative measure should be clear and precise and its
application should be foreseeable to persons subject to it, in accordance with the case-law of the Court of Justice of
the European Union (the ‘Court of Justice’) and the European Court of Human Rights.
(42) Where processing is based on the data subject's consent, the controller should be able to demonstrate that the
data subject has given consent to the processing operation. In particular in the context of a written declaration on
another matter, safeguards should ensure that the data subject is aware of the fact that and the extent to which
consent is given. In accordance with Council Directive 93/13/EEC [10] a declaration of consent pre-formulated by
the controller should be provided in an intelligible and easily accessible form, using clear and plain language and it
should not contain unfair terms. For consent to be informed, the data subject should be aware at least of the identity
of the controller and the purposes of the processing for which the personal data are intended. Consent should not be
regarded as freely given if the data subject has no genuine or free choice or is unable to refuse or withdraw consent
without detriment.
[10] Council Directive 93/13/EEC of 5 April 1993 on unfair terms in consumer contracts (OJ L 95, 21.4.1993, p.
29). https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/AUTO/?uri=OJ:L:1993:095:TOC
(43) In order to ensure that consent is freely given, consent should not provide a valid legal ground for the processing
of personal data in a specific case where there is a clear imbalance between the data subject and the controller, in
particular where the controller is a public authority and it is therefore unlikely that consent was freely given in all the
circumstances of that specific situation. Consent is presumed not to be freely given if it does not allow separate
consent to be given to different personal data processing operations despite it being appropriate in the individual case,
or if the performance of a contract, including the provision of a service, is dependent on the consent despite such
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 9 / 13
www.gdpr-text.com/en
consent not being necessary for such performance.
(44) Processing should be lawful where it is necessary in the context of a contract or the intention to enter into a
contract.
(45) Where processing is carried out in accordance with a legal obligation to which the controller is subject or where
processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official
authority, the processing should have a basis in Union or Member State law. This Regulation does not require a
specific law for each individual processing. A law as a basis for several processing operations based on a legal
obligation to which the controller is subject or where processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried
out in the public interest or in the exercise of an official authority may be sufficient. It should also be for Union or
Member State law to determine the purpose of processing. Furthermore, that law could specify the general conditions
of this Regulation governing the lawfulness of personal data processing, establish specifications for determining the
controller, the type of personal data which are subject to the processing, the data subjects concerned, the entities to
which the personal data may be disclosed, the purpose limitations, the storage period and other measures to ensure
lawful and fair processing. It should also be for Union or Member State law to determine whether the controller
performing a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority should be a public authority
or another natural or legal person governed by public law, or, where it is in the public interest to do so, including for
health purposes such as public health and social protection and the management of health care services, by private
law, such as a professional association.
(46) The processing of personal data should also be regarded to be lawful where it is necessary to protect an interest
which is essential for the life of the data subject or that of another natural person. Processing of personal data based
on the vital interest of another natural person should in principle take place only where the processing cannot be
manifestly based on another legal basis. Some types of processing may serve both important grounds of public
interest and the vital interests of the data subject as for instance when processing is necessary for humanitarian
purposes, including for monitoring epidemics and their spread or in situations of humanitarian emergencies, in
particular in situations of natural and man-made disasters.
(47) The legitimate interests of a controller, including those of a controller to which the personal data may be
disclosed, or of a third party, may provide a legal basis for processing, provided that the interests or the fundamental
rights and freedoms of the data subject are not overriding, taking into consideration the reasonable expectations of
data subjects based on their relationship with the controller. Such legitimate interest could exist for example where
there is a relevant and appropriate relationship between the data subject and the controller in situations such as where
the data subject is a client or in the service of the controller. At any rate the existence of a legitimate interest would
need careful assessment including whether a data subject can reasonably expect at the time and in the context of the
collection of the personal data that processing for that purpose may take place. The interests and fundamental rights
of the data subject could in particular override the interest of the data controller where personal data are processed in
circumstances where data subjects do not reasonably expect further processing. Given that it is for the legislator to
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 10 / 13
www.gdpr-text.com/en
provide by law for the legal basis for public authorities to process personal data, that legal basis should not apply to
the processing by public authorities in the performance of their tasks. The processing of personal data strictly
necessary for the purposes of preventing fraud also constitutes a legitimate interest of the data controller concerned.
The processing of personal data for direct marketing purposes may be regarded as carried out for a legitimate
interest.
(48) Controllers that are part of a group of undertakings or institutions affiliated to a central body may have a
legitimate interest in transmitting personal data within the group of undertakings for internal administrative purposes,
including the processing of clients' or employees' personal data. The general principles for the transfer of personal
data, within a group of undertakings, to an undertaking located in a third country remain unaffected.
(49) The processing of personal data to the extent strictly necessary and proportionate for the purposes of ensuring
network and information security, i.e. the ability of a network or an information system to resist, at a given level of
confidence, accidental events or unlawful or malicious actions that compromise the availability, authenticity, integrity
and confidentiality of stored or transmitted personal data, and the security of the related services offered by, or
accessible via, those networks and systems, by public authorities, by computer emergency response teams (CERTs),
computer security incident response teams (CSIRTs), by providers of electronic communications networks and
services and by providers of security technologies and services, constitutes a legitimate interest of the data controller
concerned. This could, for example, include preventing unauthorised access to electronic communications networks
and malicious code distribution and stopping ‘denial of service’ attacks and damage to computer and electronic
communication systems.
(50) The processing of personal data for purposes other than those for which the personal data were initially collected
should be allowed only where the processing is compatible with the purposes for which the personal data were
initially collected. In such a case, no legal basis separate from that which allowed the collection of the personal data is
required. If the processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the
exercise of official authority vested in the controller, Union or Member State law may determine and specify the
tasks and purposes for which the further processing should be regarded as compatible and lawful. Further processing
for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or statistical purposes should be
considered to be compatible lawful processing operations. The legal basis provided by Union or Member State law
for the processing of personal data may also provide a legal basis for further processing. In order to ascertain whether
a purpose of further processing is compatible with the purpose for which the personal data are initially collected, the
controller, after having met all the requirements for the lawfulness of the original processing, should take into
account, inter alia: any link between those purposes and the purposes of the intended further processing; the context
in which the personal data have been collected, in particular the reasonable expectations of data subjects based on
their relationship with the controller as to their further use; the nature of the personal data; the consequences of the
intended further processing for data subjects; and the existence of appropriate safeguards in both the original and
intended further processing operations.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 11 / 13
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Where the data subject has given consent or the processing is based on Union or Member State law which constitutes
a necessary and proportionate measure in a democratic society to safeguard, in particular, important objectives of
general public interest, the controller should be allowed to further process the personal data irrespective of the
compatibility of the purposes. In any case, the application of the principles set out in this Regulation and in particular
the information of the data subject on those other purposes and on his or her rights including the right to object,
should be ensured. Indicating possible criminal acts or threats to public security by the controller and transmitting the
relevant personal data in individual cases or in several cases relating to the same criminal act or threats to public
security to a competent authority should be regarded as being in the legitimate interest pursued by the controller.
However, such transmission in the legitimate interest of the controller or further processing of personal data should
be prohibited if the processing is not compatible with a legal, professional or other binding obligation of secrecy.
(155) Member State law or collective agreements, including ‘works agreements’, may provide for specific rules on the
processing of employees' personal data in the employment context, in particular for the conditions under which
personal data in the employment context may be processed on the basis of the consent of the employee, the purposes
of the recruitment, the performance of the contract of employment, including discharge of obligations laid down by
law or by collective agreements, management, planning and organisation of work, equality and diversity in the
workplace, health and safety at work, and for the purposes of the exercise and enjoyment, on an individual or
collective basis, of rights and benefits related to employment, and for the purpose of the termination of the
employment relationship.
Guidelines & Case Law
Documents
Article 29 Working Party, Opinion 6/2014 on the Notion of Legitimate Interests of the Data Controller Under Article
7 of Directive 95/46/EC (2014).
EDPB, Assessing the Necessity of Measures That Limit the Fundamental Right to the Protection of Personal Data: A
Toolkit (2017).
WP29, Opinion on data processing at work (2017).
EDPB, Guidelines on Assessing the Proportionality of Measures That Limit the Fundamental Rights to Privacy and to
the Protection of Personal Data (2019).
EDPB, Guidelines 2/2019 on the Processing of Personal Data under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in the Context of the
Provision of Online Services to Data Subjects (2019).
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 12 / 13
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Data Protection Commission of Ireland,  Guidance Note: Legal Bases for Processing Personal Data (2019).
Data Protection Commission (Ireland), Data Protection Considerations Relating to Receivership (2020).
EDPB, Guidelines 8/2020 on the targeting of social media users (2020).
European Commission, Guidance on Apps supporting the fight against COVID 19 pandemic in relation to data
protection Brussels (2020).
EDPB, Guidelines 02/2021 on Virtual Voice Assistants (2021).
Case Law
CJEC, Rechnungshof/Österreichischer Rundfunk, C-465/00, C-138/01 and C-139/01 (2003).
CJEC, Huber/Germany, C-524/06 (2008).
CJEU, Scarlet Extended SA/Société belge des auteurs, compositeurs et éditeurs, C-70/10 (2011).
CJEU, Google Spain SL/Agencia española de protección de datos, C-131/12 (2014).
ECHR, Antović and Mirković v. Montenegro, no. 70838/13 (2017).
ECHR, López Ribalda v. Spain, nos 1874/13 and 8567/13 (2019).
Belgian DPA Fines Belgian Telecommunications Provider for Several Data Protection Infringements (2020). Brief
description in English.
Norwegian DPA, issues fine to Aquateknikk AS (2021).
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 13 / 13
