EN
Article 15.
Right of access by the data subject
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
www.data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com
info@data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Article 15.
1. The data subject shall have the right to obtain from the controller confirmation as to whether or not personal
data concerning him or her are being processed, and, where that is the case, access to the personal data and the
following information:
(a) the purposes of the processing;
(b) the categories of personal data concerned;
(c) the recipients or categories of recipient to whom the personal data have been or will be disclosed, in particular
recipients in third countries or international organisations;
(d) where possible, the envisaged period for which the personal data will be stored, or, if not possible, the criteria
used to determine that period;
(e) the existence of the right to request from the controller rectification or erasure of personal data or restriction of
processing of personal data concerning the data subject or to object to such processing;
(f) the right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority;
(g) where the personal data are not collected from the data subject, any available information as to their source;
(h) the existence of automated decision-making, including profiling, referred to in Article 22(1) and (4) and, at
least in those cases, meaningful information about the logic involved, as well as the significance and the envisaged
consequences of such processing for the data subject.
2. Where personal data are transferred to a third country or to an international organisation, the data subject shall
have the right to be informed of the appropriate safeguards pursuant to Article 46 relating to the transfer.
3. The controller shall provide a copy of the personal data undergoing processing. For any further copies requested
by the data subject, the controller may charge a reasonable fee based on administrative costs. Where the data
subject makes the request by electronic means, and unless otherwise requested by the data subject, the information
shall be provided in a commonly used electronic form.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 2 / 5
www.gdpr-text.com/en
4. The right to obtain a copy referred to in paragraph 3 shall not adversely affect the rights and freedoms of others.
General Data Protection Regulation (EU GDPR)
The latest consolidated version of the Regulation with corrections by Corrigendum, OJ L 127, 23.5.2018, p. 2
((EU) 2016/679). Source: EUR-lex.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 3 / 5
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Related information Article 15. Right of access by the data subject
Recitals
(63) A data subject should have the right of access to personal data which have been collected concerning him or her,
and to exercise that right easily and at reasonable intervals, in order to be aware of, and verify, the lawfulness of the
processing. This includes the right for data subjects to have access to data concerning their health, for example the
data in their medical records containing information such as diagnoses, examination results, assessments by treating
physicians and any treatment or interventions provided. Every data subject should therefore have the right to know
and obtain communication in particular with regard to the purposes for which the personal data are processed, where
possible the period for which the personal data are processed, the recipients of the personal data, the logic involved in
any automatic personal data processing and, at least when based on profiling, the consequences of such processing.
Where possible, the controller should be able to provide remote access to a secure system which would provide the
data subject with direct access to his or her personal data. That right should not adversely affect the rights or
freedoms of others, including trade secrets or intellectual property and in particular the copyright protecting the
software. However, the result of those considerations should not be a refusal to provide all information to the data
subject. Where the controller processes a large quantity of information concerning the data subject, the controller
should be able to request that, before the information is delivered, the data subject specify the information or
processing activities to which the request relates.
(64) The controller should use all reasonable measures to verify the identity of a data subject who requests access, in
particular in the context of online services and online identifiers. A controller should not retain personal data for the
sole purpose of being able to react to potential requests.
Guidelines & Case Law
Guidelines
Information Commissioner’s Office, Right of Access (2020).
EDPB, Guidelines 8/2020 on the targeting of social media users (2020).
EDPB, Guidelines 3/2019 on Processing of Personal Data through Video Devices (2020).
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 4 / 5
www.gdpr-text.com/en
EDPB, Guidelines 02/2021 on Virtual Voice Assistants (2021).
EDPB, Guidelines 01/2022on data subject rights – Right of access (2022).
Case Law
CJEU, College van burgemeester en wethouders van Rotterdam/Rijkeboer, C-553/07 (2009).
CJEU, Nowak/Data Protection Commissioner, C-434/16 (2017).
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 5 / 5
