EN
Article 1.
Subject-matter and objectives
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
www.data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com
info@data-privacy-
office.eu
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Article 1.
1. This Regulation lays down rules relating to the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of
personal data and rules relating to the free movement of personal data.
2. This Regulation protects fundamental rights and freedoms of natural persons and in particular their right to the
protection of personal data.
3. The free movement of personal data within the Union shall be neither restricted nor prohibited for reasons
connected with the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data.
General Data Protection Regulation (EU GDPR)
The latest consolidated version of the Regulation with corrections by Corrigendum, OJ L 127, 23.5.2018, p. 2
((EU) 2016/679). Source: EUR-lex.
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 2 / 5
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Related information Article 1. Subject-matter and objectives
Recitals
(1) The protection of natural persons in relation to the processing of personal data is a fundamental right. Article 8(1)
of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (the ‘Charter’) and Article 16(1) of the Treaty on the
Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) provide that everyone has the right to the protection of personal data
concerning him or her.
(2) The principles of, and rules on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of their personal
data should, whatever their nationality or residence, respect their fundamental rights and freedoms, in particular their
right to the protection of personal data. This Regulation is intended to contribute to the accomplishment of an area of
freedom, security and justice and of an economic union, to economic and social progress, to the strengthening and the
convergence of the economies within the internal market, and to the well-being of natural persons.
(3) Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council [4] seeks to harmonise the protection of
fundamental rights and freedoms of natural persons in respect of processing activities and to ensure the free flow of
personal data between Member States.
[4] Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data (OJ L 281,
23.11.1995, p. 31). https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/AUTO/?uri=OJ:L:1995:281:TOC
(4) The processing of personal data should be designed to serve mankind. The right to the protection of personal data
is not an absolute right; it must be considered in relation to its function in society and be balanced against other
fundamental rights, in accordance with the principle of proportionality. This Regulation respects all fundamental
rights and observes the freedoms and principles recognised in the Charter as enshrined in the Treaties, in particular
the respect for private and family life, home and communications, the protection of personal data, freedom of
thought, conscience and religion, freedom of expression and information, freedom to conduct a business, the right to
an effective remedy and to a fair trial, and cultural, religious and linguistic diversity.
(5) The economic and social integration resulting from the functioning of the internal market has led to a substantial
increase in cross-border flows of personal data. The exchange of personal data between public and private actors,
including natural persons, associations and undertakings across the Union has increased. National authorities in the
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 3 / 5
www.gdpr-text.com/en
Member States are being called upon by Union law to cooperate and exchange personal data so as to be able to
perform their duties or carry out tasks on behalf of an authority in another Member State.
(6) Rapid technological developments and globalisation have brought new challenges for the protection of personal
data. The scale of the collection and sharing of personal data has increased significantly. Technology allows both
private companies and public authorities to make use of personal data on an unprecedented scale in order to pursue
their activities. Natural persons increasingly make personal information available publicly and globally. Technology
has transformed both the economy and social life, and should further facilitate the free flow of personal data within
the Union and the transfer to third countries and international organisations, while ensuring a high level of the
protection of personal data.
(7) Those developments require a strong and more coherent data protection framework in the Union, backed by
strong enforcement, given the importance of creating the trust that will allow the digital economy to develop across
the internal market. Natural persons should have control of their own personal data. Legal and practical certainty for
natural persons, economic operators and public authorities should be enhanced.
(8) Where this Regulation provides for specifications or restrictions of its rules by Member State law, Member States
may, as far as necessary for coherence and for making the national provisions comprehensible to the persons to
whom they apply, incorporate elements of this Regulation into their national law.
(9) The objectives and principles of Directive 95/46/EC remain sound, but it has not prevented fragmentation in the
implementation of data protection across the Union, legal uncertainty or a widespread public perception that there are
significant risks to the protection of natural persons, in particular with regard to online activity. Differences in the
level of protection of the rights and freedoms of natural persons, in particular the right to the protection of personal
data, with regard to the processing of personal data in the Member States may prevent the free flow of personal data
throughout the Union. Those differences may therefore constitute an obstacle to the pursuit of economic activities at
the level of the Union, distort competition and impede authorities in the discharge of their responsibilities under
Union law. Such a difference in levels of protection is due to the existence of differences in the implementation and
application of Directive 95/46/EC.
(10) In order to ensure a consistent and high level of protection of natural persons and to remove the obstacles to
flows of personal data within the Union, the level of protection of the rights and freedoms of natural persons with
regard to the processing of such data should be equivalent in all Member States. Consistent and homogenous
application of the rules for the protection of the fundamental rights and freedoms of natural persons with regard to
the processing of personal data should be ensured throughout the Union. Regarding the processing of personal data
for compliance with a legal obligation, for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the
exercise of official authority vested in the controller, Member States should be allowed to maintain or introduce
national provisions to further specify the application of the rules of this Regulation. In conjunction with the general
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 4 / 5
www.gdpr-text.com/en
and horizontal law on data protection implementing Directive 95/46/EC, Member States have several sector-specific
laws in areas that need more specific provisions. This Regulation also provides a margin of manoeuvre for Member
States to specify its rules, including for the processing of special categories of personal data (‘sensitive data’). To that
extent, this Regulation does not exclude Member State law that sets out the circumstances for specific processing
situations, including determining more precisely the conditions under which the processing of personal data is lawful.
(11) Effective protection of personal data throughout the Union requires the strengthening and setting out in detail of
the rights of data subjects and the obligations of those who process and determine the processing of personal data, as
well as equivalent powers for monitoring and ensuring compliance with the rules for the protection of personal data
and equivalent sanctions for infringements in the Member States.
(12) Article 16(2) TFEU mandates the European Parliament and the Council to lay down the rules relating to the
protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and the rules relating to the free
movement of personal data.
(13) In order to ensure a consistent level of protection for natural persons throughout the Union and to prevent
divergences hampering the free movement of personal data within the internal market, a Regulation is necessary to
provide legal certainty and transparency for economic operators, including micro, small and medium-sized
enterprises, and to provide natural persons in all Member States with the same level of legally enforceable rights and
obligations and responsibilities for controllers and processors, to ensure consistent monitoring of the processing of
personal data, and equivalent sanctions in all Member States as well as effective cooperation between the supervisory
authorities of different Member States. The proper functioning of the internal market requires that the free
movement of personal data within the Union is not restricted or prohibited for reasons connected with the protection
of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data. To take account of the specific situation of micro,
small and medium-sized enterprises, this Regulation includes a derogation for organisations with fewer than 250
employees with regard to record-keeping. In addition, the Union institutions and bodies, and Member States and their
supervisory authorities, are encouraged to take account of the specific needs of micro, small and medium-sized
enterprises in the application of this Regulation. The notion of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises should
draw from Article 2 of the Annex to Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC [5].
[5] Commission Recommendation of 6 May 2003 concerning the definition of micro, small and medium-sized
enterprises
(C(2003)
1422)
(OJ
L
124,
20.5.2003,
p.
36).
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/AUTO/?uri=OJ:L:2003:124:TOC
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
GDPR training, consulting and DPO outsourcing
page 5 / 5
